---
layout: page
title: "Valuing Spotify"
---

Spotify was recently valued at [$4
billion](http://online.wsj.com/news/articles/SB10001424052702304791704579212152163448852). This
is a high valuation, even though the financials don't look too great:
the margins are low, and the bargaining position leaves a lot to be
desired.

Spotify suffers from the fact that it relies upon music publishers to
provide its core value, music. The problem Spotify faces is that
publishers can charge as much as they want, and they can threaten to
withdraw their music from the service. Spotify can charge what the
market will bear, but the entirety of the revenues will be paid to the
publishers in licensing fees. Any profit it makes will be bargained
away by the labels. This explains why Spotify [makes no
profit](http://www.theverge.com/2013/7/31/4575506/spotify-doubled-revenue-in-2012-but-losses-grow),
and why some analysts are
[bewildered](http://www.inc.com/jill-krasny/spotify-aluation-tone-deaf.html)
at the current $4 billion valuation. How can anyone hope for Spotify
to make a $400 million annual profit with this kind of bad bargaining
hand?

This sort of systemic bad bargaining position is called
["holdup"](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hold-up_problem). In a
business relationship, the party that holds the bulk of the bargaining
power determines the outcome in a pretty straightforward way --- this
is why "abusive monopoly" is even a thing: if I own the only oil well
in the world and you need oil, I can charge whatever I want and you
have to deal with it. More accurately, I can charge as much as
possible to eat up all your consumer surplus, minus some small amount
to make it worth your time to bother at all.

Holdup
------

Holdup is a fairly common phenomenon in various industries, and there
are some standard endgames that play out. It is easiest to see in the
NFL: the NFL players are the commodity that fans pay billions of
dollars to watch. The NFL _teams_ might have some fan allegiance, but
if all the players defected and started a rival league, the fans (and
hence the money) would probably follow them. This means that the NFL
players union has a lot of bargaining power, and the deals reflect
that. NFL player salaries over time have ratcheted up until they
capture almost all the producer surplus available. They negotiate for
a fixed percentage (around 50%) of all revenues to go to player
salaries. This is pretty high given the high costs of operating NFL
teams. (Now you might wonder how the NFL could have a salary cap when
the players have most of the bargaining power. This is because the
players know that the salary cap is in the best interests of the
league as a whole: the salary cap means that a single team cannot FC
Barcelona-ize and buy all the best players. It ensures that talent is
spread across teams to make the whole league competitive. The top
talent still gets paid. But in exchange the star players are spread
across all the teams.)

Another example of holdup is in retail. Retailers benefit from
economies of scale, so retail chains are usually large in size and few
in number. Hence Walmart. Now Walmart has absurdly low prices, so you
might wonder how the holdup is resulting in large profits. The answer
is that Walmart makes most of its margin on the supplier side: it is a
giant monopsony (single buyer), so suppliers are forced to sell at
cutthroat rates. They can't afford to not sell to Walmart (Walmart
moves huge volume compared to any other potential supplier, and the
single point of contact vastly simplifies sales than setting up
distributor networks that eat into profit margins)

Escaping Holdup
---------------

One standard way to escape holdup is vertical integration, either by
merging, or by entering into long term non-compete vertical
contracts. This means that you own both sides of the deal, so there's
no bargaining between the two sides to squeeze one out to zero
profit. Simple. This is why we have "store brands" in retailing. This
is also why the big oil tycoons in 19th century America also were
railroad tycoons. If you had oil out in the boonies but couldn't get
it out to the industrial centers where there was demand, the guy who
owned the railroad could demand sky high prices for
transportation. Your only hope was to own the railroad as well. (And
remember, once you've built a well, you can't stop the thing. You
really are screwed if you can't get the oil transported and sold as it
flows).


Spotify's Potential
-------------------

The real value of Spotify isn't in scaling into a music service that
is still beholden to the music publishers. There's no money in
that. Instead, we have to look to the example of Netflix, in the
related, but slightly different industry of movies and television.

Netflix is a profitable company that streams other people's
content. They got a huge headstart by signing a sweet long term deal
(now expired) with Starz that gave them the right to stream a tonne of
movies for cheap (Starz didn't know what it was doing). Without that
deal, Netflix would be much poorer now than it was. However, they came
to the point where the big studios woke up, realized the money in
streaming, and started hiking their licensing fees. The studios, after
all (like the music labels) own the content, which is what
fundamentally consumers want. So Netflix would be a low margin
no-profit hellhole... Except Netflix realized this and started making
their own content. This is the classic solution of
vertically-integrate-yourself-out-of-your-holdup-problem. Except, the
other 800lb gorilla in the room, HBO, realized this too, and started
trying fast to set up their own streaming solution (HBO GO). Hence Ted
Sarandos' (Chief of content at Netflix) words ["The goal is to become
HBO faster than HBO can become
us"](http://gizmodo.com/5980103/netflix-the-goal-is-to-become-hbo-faster-than-hbo-can-become-us). It's
a classic [race to the
sea](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Race_to_the_Sea) situation, with two
sides rapidly maneuvering to beat the other one to getting the full
stack vertical up first. (Aside: my money is on Netflix, but not at
slamdunk odds. HBO can still win this).

Spotify's End Game
------------

Spotify is trying a similar strategy in the music industry. The goal
is to be so big that everyone gets their music from Spotify. If they
hit that level of cultural penetration, suddenly, the holdup is
flipped. If you want to be relevant, you _have_ to be on Spotify. New
artists would do anything to be on Spotify, and labels would be forced
to be on Spotify, or just risk cultural irrelevance. Since hit-driven
music has value because everyone else is listening/dancing to it, this
gives Spotify all the power. And that actually is worth billions of
dollars. So the $4 billion valuation is not justified because Spotify
has long term annual revenue projections in the $400 million range,
but because they have a much smaller percentage chance of completely
dominating the music scene. If the probability of this strategy
succeeding is 10%, and the long term profits are in the $4 billion
range, that justifies the valuation. I'm not saying I'd make that bet
(I'm not an investor), but it's a more reasonable interpretation of
the valuation than
[this](http://www.inc.com/jill-krasny/spotify-aluation-tone-deaf.html).
