---
layout: page
title: "A High Frequency Trading Thought Experiment"
---

The Recent Furor Around HFT
-----

Note, if you're up to date on the recent HFT circus on the internet,
just skip to [the last section](#thoughtexperiment)

Literature Review
----

Much has been said on the tubes about High Frequency Trading, now that
Michael Lewis' new book [Flash
Boys](http://books.google.com/books?id=UcIkAwAAQBAJ) is out. Michael
Lewis' book is anti-HFT (I have not yet read it, although I much
enjoyed Liar's Poker and The Big Short), arguing that it serves no
useful societal function but merely transfers money from "the little
guys" to the HFT hedge
funds. [Here](http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/06/magazine/flash-boys-michael-lewis.html?_r=0)
is an excerpt in last week's New York Times.

Here is a collection of interesting commentary that I have found so
far on the topic. Note that there is a bottomless pit of cheap talk on
this subject, and everybody has an opinion. I've tried to restrict
these to a set of good basis vectors that cover the entire vectorspace
of the debate.

* [Rajiv
Sethi](http://rajivsethi.blogspot.com/2014/04/superfluous-financial-intermediation.html)
gives a couple instances that clearly show that *some* HFT adds
nothing to the market, but merely extract some surplus that would
otherwise have accrued to the other traders.

* [Felix
  Salmon](http://blogs.reuters.com/felix-salmon/2014/03/31/michael-lewiss-flawed-new-book/)
  criticizes the book, arguing that in fact HFT *helps* the little guy
  with the ETrade account at the expense of the big institutional
  funds, which is the reverse of what Michael Lewis says it does.

* [James Kwak](http://baselinescenario.com/2014/04/04/incidence/)
  argues that Felix Salmon is wrong, because "big institutional funds"
  really means 401ks, IRAs, i.e. grandma's retirement money, so it's
  still siphoning off "the little guy's" money for no net societal
  gain.

* The founder of Vanguard (the company that has done the most to help
  small investors get the most return at the cheapest fees), John
  Bogle, [argues that HFT helps the little
  guys](http://www.cbsnews.com/news/jack-bogle-michael-lewis-is-wrong-about-rigged-markets/)
  because the lowered bid-ask spreads benefit the large funds, which are in turn owned by the little guys.

* [Tyler
  Cowen](http://marginalrevolution.com/marginalrevolution/2014/04/flash-boys-the-new-michael-lewis-book.html)
  adds his predictably contrarian view that the book offers a "fun"
  narrative, and that it clearly wasn't intended to be a fair and
  balanced book and that somehow excuses it from any criticism. I'm
  not quite sure why I'm even including this here, but perhaps there's
  a Straussian angle that my subconscious needs to get out... (Aside:
  why isn't there a good Tyler Cowen blog post generator? Must I do
  everything myself?)

* [Noah
  Smith](http://noahpinionblog.blogspot.com/2014/04/no-one-really-knows-if-hft-is-good-or.html)
  offers an agnostic viewpoint that we don't really know if HFT is
  good or bad, so we should have many exchanges with different rules
  for and against HFT, to let the market decide. He offers an
  important addendum that the term "HFT" is nebulous and includes many
  diverse traders with diverse strategies, and thus is greatly
  confusing the debate.

Of the above posts, I found Rajiv Sethi's and Noah Smith's
contributions most useful. I like Rajiv Sethi's post because it offers
a couple clear scenarios where HFTs extract rents without offering any
clear value to society at all. Rajiv Sethi calls this "superfluous
financial intermediation", or when the HFT inserts herself between two
traders who would have traded anyway, and arbitrages herself a slice
of the surplus from the trade. She does not make the trade happen
(i.e. this is not "[market
making](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Market_maker)"), and she does
not provide liquidity to the market. If these trades were made
illegal, nothing of value would be lost.

I like Noah Smith's post because because it is level-headed and clear,
explaining that "HFT" as a term covers a large, nebulous set of
strategies. He doesn't get muddled up in value judgements about
whether little guys are hurt, etc. It makes the important point that
economic theorists are not settled on whether "[noise
traders](http://www.stanford.edu/~milgrom/publishedarticles/Information%20Trade%20and%20Common%20Knowledge.pdf)"
might actually be necessary to oil the wheels of the market. In
essence, we know very little about the stock market in general, and a
lot of the critiques are just talking past each other. So principled
experimentation would be the wisest course of action. This would also
give people the option to trade in markets without HFT action, and
with HFT action, so people would have to put their money where their
mouth is.


----

To cut through the noise, let me stipulate a few points:

* First, let's ignore the market maker HFTs. Market maker HFTs are
those that see that there are some folks who have an irrational
preference for settling their trade *right now*. This irrational
preference is indicated by the fact that they trade using "market
orders" (i.e. dear exchange, please buy me 1000 AAPL shares at any
price), versus "limit orders (i.e. dear exchange, please buy me 1000
AAPL shares at most $531.84). A patient investor who wishes to extract
the full value should wait and issue limit orders at the best prices
until her entire order is fulfilled. Nevertheless, some people don't
care about moving the market by pennies. They have some bigger picture
reasons to trade, and they don't care to wait. Market makers know that
these folks periodically come into the market, jump in front of them
and give them their desires fast, knowing they can offload them a few
seconds from now when some other impatient investor comes around from
the opposite side of the trade later. Market making is clearly
good. It gives impatient investors what they want, which is instant
trading. This is what HFT enthusiasts call "bringing liquidity to the
market". I'm not talking about market makers.

* Let's leave aside the issue of whether HFT extracts money primarily
from small traders, or large traders. I don't care about the little
guy. What I care about is what Rajiv Sethi brings up, which is
*whether an HFT extracts value from society while bringing absolutely
nothing to the table*. That is clearly a mechanism design failure, and
we can change the rules of the game to make that go away.


A Thought Experiment
----

<a name="thoughtexperiment"> </a>

The most interesting point in the debate is whether some high
frequency trading counts as "front running". "Front running" is the
practice of a brokerage taking your order, but fulfilling its own side
order on the same (or related) position in advance of filling your
order. It is quite clear why front running is illegal: your order to
the stock exchange contains a clear signal about something. You are
trusting your brokerage to execute the trade so that you can extract
the value from that signal. Instead they are using that signal for
their own gain. By the time your order hits the deck, they've already
extracted some (if not all) of the value of that signal by moving the
market.

Here is a list of scenarios, where I try to illustrate why I think
that the NYSE is front-running (by the way, I'm not singling out the
NYSE. NASDAQ also does the same thing, as do other exchanges. It's
just my running example). Note: The following section contains "click
to reveal the answer" links after each bullet so that you can think
about each hypothetical situation before seeing my answer. This
feature may not work in your feed reader, so you should read this post
in a separate page.

* Suppose the NYSE took your orders, but also ran a hedge fund on the
  side. <a href="#ans1" onclick="toggle_visibility('ans1');"> Would
  this be front running? (Click to see answer).</a> <div id="ans1"
  style='display:none'>No, but it definitely raises suspicion.</div>

* Suppose the NYSE took your orders, but also ran a hedge fund on the
  side. This hedge fund gets to see your orders, and insert its own
  orders in front of your orders. <a href="#ans2"
  onclick="toggle_visibility('ans2');"> Would this be front running?
  </a> <div id="ans2" style='display:none'>Yes, this is the textbook definition of frontrunning.</div>

* Suppose the NYSE took your orders, but instead of running its own
  hedge fund, sold your order stream to another independent hedge
  fund, and let them trade in front of you. <a href="#ans3"
  onclick="toggle_visibility('ans3')"> Would this be front running?
  </a> <div id="ans3" style='display:none;'>Yes, they've just hired an intermediary to do the dirty work.</div>

* To make the analogy easier to see, suppose the NYSE, for some
  inexplicable reason, made you shout your order at the start of a 100
  meter track, and then run to the end of the 100 meter
  track. However, whoever finishes the race first gets to execute the
  order first. <a href="#ans4" onclick="toggle_visibility('ans4');">
  Would this be front running?  </a> <div id="ans4"
  style='display:none;'>No, it's not front running, but this would be
  really weird. You shouldn't trade at such an exchange if you can
  afford to.</div>

* Now suppose the NYSE ran the same race, but sold tickets to some
  folk (presumably to be bought by some hedge fund that hires Usain
  Bolt to deliver the orders) to start the race with a 10 meter head
  start. <a href="#ans5" onclick="toggle_visibility('ans5');"> Would
  this be front running?  </a> <div id="ans5"
  style='display:none;'>Yes. Because the NYSE is extracting rents from
  the front running going on. </div>

Because the NYSE rents out space for HFT hedge funds to install their
server racks physically closest to the actual exchange, and also sells
premium high speed data connections to these funds, this is
essentially front running through an intermediary. 

To be fair, there's a tiny complication in my analogy that makes it
not quite work: the NYSE isn't actually showing them the order stream
before your trade is executed, merely letting them pounce on it before
anyone *else* sees it. So it's not actually front running. But it sure
is enabling socially unproductive work, as Rajiv Sethi demonstrates,
and *then cutting themselves a portion of the rents*. It's really the
latter part that I object to. The NYSE shouldn't be extracting rents
from such activity, and that makes the situation stink

I think that HFT should probably be made illegal, or at least, the
rules of trading should be changed to strongly disincentivize it. If
we don't like the rules, we shouldn't be [irrationally wedded to the
status quo](http://www.hks.harvard.edu/fs/rzeckhau/SQBDM.pdf). We should
just change the rules, or at least have some competing exchanges where
traders can opt out of interacting with HFTs. I strongly suspect that
the non-HFTs would flee to those exchanges, leaving the vultures
behind.
