---
layout: post
title: "Valuing Polio Vaccines"
category: 
tags: []
---

I'm a big fan of the [Gates
Foundation](http://www.gatesfoundation.org/) for raising the sanity
waterline as far as developmental aid is concerned. The Gates
Foundation has finally brought some semblance of quantitative analysis
to the difficult task of developmental aid, which is to be praised.

The Gates Foundation has a focus on raising [Disability Adjusted
Life-Years](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Disability-adjusted_life_year),
or DALYs with their aid interventions. This is a reasonable metric on
which to begin judging a potential intervention. The Gates Foundation,
in the grand comparison, has limited resources (when compared to
national governments), and has to be very discerning in where they
deploy money. DALYs help make that decision. (Aside: I'm vastly
simplifying here; if you want a more nuanced picture go read [Chris
Blattman](http://chrisblattman.com/), or someone with more sense than
me).

GiveWell
--------

One made-up example: There are children dying of malaria in two
underdeveloped countries, Elbonia and Kneebonia. You could distribute
bed-nets to address this epidemic. You've empirically determined that
this would save 1 life for $5 in each country. However, Kneebonia also
has an epidemic of cholera. If half the children who you save from
malaria in Kneebonia would go on to die from cholera anyway, then the
DALYs per dollar are higher in Elbonia. If you have limited resources,
you should focus on Elbonia.

This is the sort of math that [GiveWell](http://www.givewell.org/)
attempts to do. As opposed to [Charity
Navigator](http://www.charitynavigator.org/), which attempts to answer
whether charities do what they say they are doing without much comment
on the value of those aims, GiveWell attempts to judge their relative
stated goals as well, as well as their relative capitalization levels,
to focus on the ones where your marginal contribution would do the
highest good. It's a fantastic charity, and it is well worth your
while to look at their recommendations if you're going to donate
money. The Gates Foundation also does this sort of analysis, and uses
it to make their funding decisions. I find this very encouraging for
the future of aid in general.

A Valuation of The Gates Foundation's Polio Eradication Drive
-----------------

I've been evangelizing on behalf of the Gates Foundation for quite
some time now, but received some blow-back from a couple friends,
because of the Gates Foundation's focus on eradicating polio. Polio
has been aggressively contained, and the foundation is spending a lot
of money to eradicate it. On the surface, the marginal DALYs per
dollar gained are quite low from polio eradication, versus, say,
[deworming kids in Kenya and
India](http://www.givewell.org/international/top-charities/deworm-world-initiative). So
why is the Gates Foundation focusing so much money on eradicating
Polio, instead of redirecting that money elsewhere, where the DALYs
per dollar are much higher?

This analysis misses one point: _eradication_ is tremendously valuable
_beyond_ the base cost of the individual kids being vaccinated. Polio
consumes a large amount of aid dollars on an annual basis. However, if
Polio were verifiably eradicated, every country's expenditure on Polio
vaccines would drop to zero dollars, like their Smallpox vaccination
budgets today. Thus, contributing dollars towards polio eradication is
more akin to building up a
[_stock_](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stock_and_flow), which is far
more valuable than the annual _flow_ cost of polio vaccines (the exact
ratio depends on the interest rates faced by the national governments
and aid organizations, but 10x would be a conservative estimate as to
how much more valuable the stock would be, versus the flow). If Polio
eradication cost $5 billion, but resulted in national governments not
spending $1 billion each year on continued containment of polio, that
would well be worth the investment. Assuming the conservative
stock-to-flow ratio of 10, you can think of it as a permanent $10
billion increase to the capital stock of the world.
