Some related work that you're missing is in the parallel cash
economies of "black money"
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Indian_black_money) that are prevalent
in third world countries where corruption is a much larger part of the
economy (to the point where it has it's own separate accounting
system). In short, black money is money that derives from the black
market, and has not been declared for income tax purposes. Oftentimes,
when homes are sold, for example, there are two cash transactions that
take place. One "white money" transaction that keeps the capital gains
low, and the remaining in black. The white money is regular money, but
the black money needs to be disposed off. There is an implicit lower
valuation on the black money, since it cannot be used for all purposes
(and indeed, in future transactions you will try and negotiate up the
percentage of the transaction that is done "in black" to get rid of
your excess black money holdings). There are few ways to launder black
money into white money, one of the principle ones being lottery
tickets with winning numbers. (Since the lottery winners would like to
avoid taxes and will take your black money, giving you a perfect
excuse to suddenly have

You would soon see the formation of separate currencies (clean cash
vs. tainted cash) with exchange rates between them (since there will
be supply/demand imbalances in doing cash swaps). Presumably a
separate currency valuation will develop for each form of taint:
Koch-taint, blood-diamond-taint, ATT taint, all-of-the-above-taint,
etc. The relative valuation of tainted money vs. clean money would
depend on the total purchasing power of the bloc trying to impose the
blockade (and the cost they pay to impose such a blockade would again
be reflected in that price differential). I'm sure there's a neat
closed form solution in here somewhere that draws from the
macroeconomics literature...

