---
layout: page
title: "Holdup and Spotify"
---

My first post is on the concept of holdup, and the curious case of why
Spotify could have any value in the long run. Comments and criticism
welcome --- I could well be wrong in this analysis.

Holdup is just a fancy word for "lots of bargaining power". In many
business decisions, the party that holds the bulk of the bargaining
power determines the outcome in a pretty straightforward way --- this
is why "abusive monopoly" is even a thing: if I own the only oil well
in the world and you need oil, I can charge whatever I want and you
have to deal with it. More accurately, I can charge as much as
possible to eat up all your consumer surplus, minus some small amount
to make it worth your time to bother buying the product at all. In a
world with only monopolies, there is no consumer surplus.

Examples of Holdup
------------------

Let's start with some short examples of holdup in corporate
situations. Holdup is easiest to see in the NFL: the NFL players are
the commodity that fans pay billions of dollars to watch. The NFL
teams might have some fan allegiance, but if all the players defected
and started a rival league, the money would probably follow them. This
means that the NFL players union has a lot of bargaining power, and
the deals reflect that. NFL player salaries over time have ratcheted
up until they capture almost all the producer surplus available. They
negotiate for a fixed percentage (around 50%) of all revenues to go to
player salaries. This is pretty high given the high costs of operating
NFL teams. (Now you might wonder how the NFL could have a salary cap
when the players have most of the bargaining power. This is because
the players know that the salary cap is in the best interests of the
league as a whole: the salary cap means that a single team cannot FC
Barcelonaize and buy all the best players. It ensures that talent is
spread across teams to make the whole league competitive (which is
what, in the end, gets views, rather than a hypothetical Barcelona
steamrolling annually through the Champions League). The top talent
still gets paid. But in exchange the star players are spread across
all the teams.)

Another example of holdup is in retail. Retailers benefit from
economies of scale, so retail chains are usually large in size and few
in number. Hence the Walmart problem. Now Walmart has absurdly low
prices, so you might wonder how the holdup is resulting in large
profits. The answer is that Walmart makes most of its margin on the
supplier side: it is a giant monopsony (single buyer), so suppliers
are forced to sell at cutthroat rates. They can't afford to not sell
to Walmart (Walmart moves huge volume compared to any other potential
supplier, and the single point of contact vastly simplifies sales than
setting up distributor networks that eat into profit margins)

Escaping Holdup
---------------

One classic way to escape the problem of holdup is vertical
integration, either by merging, or by entering into long term
non-compete vertical supply contracts. This means that you own both
sides of the deal, so there's no bargaining between the two sides to
squeeze one out to zero profit. Simple. This is why we have "store
brands" in retailing. This is also why the big oil tycoons in 19th
century America also were railroad tycoons. If you had oil out in the
boonies but couldn't get it out to the industrial centers where there
was demand, the guy who owned the railroad could demand sky high
prices for transportation. Your only hope was to own the railroad as
well. (And remember, once you've built a well, you can't stop the
thing. You really are screwed if you can't get the oil transported and
sold as it flows).

Holdup in the Music Industry
----------------------------

Which brings us to the music industry. Record labels wield a
tremendous amount of power, and (warning: controversial statements
ahead) this is because they create most of the value in the
business. Without record labels, you have a bunch of basically
identically talented musicians making interchangeable
music. Especially when you look at music made for the lucrative 10-18
demographic, it's mostly indistinguishable product. The value add is
mostly in marketing and "image" --- which the labels manage. Once all
your classmates are into Bieber, there's tremendous pressure to get
with it and listen to Bieber. This is value that labels have created.
(aside: don't confuse the meaning of economic "value" with any sort of
moral value.) But the record labels face a new problem that
corporations stiffing other corporations don't face: the people
they're stiffing have a giant soapbox. This is why we keep hearing
that labels are evil and that they ruin musicians lives. In every
other transaction where one party steamrolls their holdup through the
other party's life, we never hear about it and it's business as usual.

One alternative I mentioned above when you cannot vertically integrate
(and believe me, if record labels could own musicians they would) is
to sign binding long term contracts. A priori to creating the value,
all the musicians are the same. So you take the lowest bidder, and
sign him to a salary of $100,000 a year for 20 years to make you an
album a year. Now he gets big due to your marketing prowess, and you
make millions off him. Profit! Not so simple. This is how you get The
Artist Formerly Known as Prince. He felt that he was being exploited,
and that the record labels were profiting unfairly off his talent. In
particular, the name "Prince" was basically owned and exploited
entirely by his label without his consent, so he changed his
name. It's a pretty sad story when you get into the details, and why
long term contracts fundamentally don't work when it's humans you're
stiffing at the other end of the deal, instead of corporations.

But bottom line: labels have tremendous bargaining power, and own the
artists in any transaction. We're aware of this on the day to day
because artists have a giant soapbox, but usually bargaining power
doesn't manifest itself in easy to see ways.

A brief diversion to television and movies
------------------------------------------

So that's a quick introduction to holdup. Before we talk about Spotify
and the holdup it faces on the producer side, let's look at
Netflix. Netflix is a profitable company that streams other people's
content. They got a huge headstart by signing a sweet long term deal
(now expired) with Starz that gave them the right to stream a tonne of
movies for cheap (Starz didn't know what it was doing). Without that
deal, Netflix would be much poorer now than it was. However, they came
to the point where the big studios woke up, realized the money in
streaming, and started hiking their licensing fees. The studios, after
all (like the music labels) own the content, which is what
fundamentally the consumers want. So Netflix is a low margin no-profit
hellhole. Or it would be, if Netflix didn't realize this and start
making their own content. This is the classic solution of
vertically-integrate-yourself-out-of-the-problem. Except, the other
800lb gorilla in the room, HBO, realizes this and is trying fast to
set up their own streaming solution (HBOGO). Hence Ted Sarandos'
(Chief of content at Netflix) words ["The goal is to become HBO faster
than HBO can become
us"](http://gizmodo.com/5980103/netflix-the-goal-is-to-become-hbo-faster-than-hbo-can-become-us). It's
the classic [race to the
sea](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Race_to_the_Sea). We'll see who wins
(my money is on Netflix, but not at slamdunk odds).

But what's the point of becoming a content creator with a no-profit
streaming arm attached? If streaming is doomed to have the holdup
disadvantage, why bother? This only makes sense if owning both gives
you some sort of synergy (there I said it. Now give me my
MBA). Otherwise you could just have made content to your hearts
content and sold it to the existing distributors. Netflix believes
(and I think this is true) that the analytics their streaming software
gives them is an unprecedented advantage in content creation. They
know what people watch, and when they watch it. They know which scenes
people don't understand and rewind. They know when people turn on
subtitles. They know in which episode people lost interest in the
series. They know when people didn't lose interest and binged the
whole weekend. All of this gives them a supreme advantage in making
content. (People like David Fincher stuff. People love watching Kevin
Spacey. Let's make this happen.)

Spotify
-------

Spotify is trying a similar thing in the music industry. 